---
project: IO-Fortran-Library
version: 1.2.0
summary: A portable, standard IO library for Modern Fortran
author: Austin C Bullock
author_email: acb.bullock@gmail.com
github: https://github.com/acbbullock
project_github: https://github.com/acbbullock/IO-Fortran-Library
license: MIT
creation_date: %Y-%m-%d %H:%M %z
print_creation_date: true
md_extensions: markdown.extensions.toc
page_dir: doc_API_design
externalize: true
---

[TOC]

# API Documentation

This API documentation was generated by [FORD](https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford) (the Fortran documentation generator).

## Purpose

The purpose of this project is to provide accessible and flexible interfaces for common input-output routines that are frequently needed for Fortran projects. The provided functionality is designed for plug-and-play with any compiler that supports the Fortran 2018 standard, and is intended to streamline workflows for projects where such functionality is needed without having to re-engineer such functionality for each project.

## Scope

The IO Fortran Library is a Fortran module [[io_fortran_lib]] which provides high level routines for doing internal and external I/O. In particular, the module provides a handful of generic interfaces and a simple derived type for doing string-based and array-based I/O that are useful for recording program data, reading data into programs, writing formatted logs and output, and for doing advanced character manipulations. For instance, one may read and write data from/to `.csv` and `.dat` files, represent numbers as strings inside of a string expression, efficiently stream text data to a `.log` file, and dynamically manipulate strings with a `String` type (including casting between numeric and character data).

@note The module is fully self-contained, with no external dependencies, and is written to be portable and compliant to the Fortran 2018 standard such that no special extensions or compiler options should be required. The public interfaces accept all intrinsic numeric types (`integer`, `real`, and `complex`) and all standard kinds provided by the intrinsic `iso_fortran_env` module (`int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`, `real32`, `real64`, and `real128`). All array-based routines additionally support up to rank 15.

## How to Use

To use `io_fortran_lib` with your [fpm](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm) project, add the following lines to your `fpm.toml` file and `use` the module in your program units to access the routines:

```toml
[dependencies]
IO-Fortran-Library = { git="https://github.com/acbbullock/IO-Fortran-Library", branch="main" }
```

See the [important user information](page/UserInfo/index.html) and [reference guide](page/Ref/index.html) for information about calling the [routines](lists/procedures.html), and further see the [tutorials](page/Examples/index.html) for complete example programs.

## License

All source code referenced is distributed under the [MIT license](https://github.com/acbbullock/IO-Fortran-Library/blob/main/LICENCE) and available at [Github](https://github.com/acbbullock/IO-Fortran-Library).

## Contact

For bug fixes or feature requests, feel free to open an issue at the [project repository](https://github.com/acbbullock/IO-Fortran-Library) or contact [acb.bullock@gmail.com](mailto:acb.bullock@gmail.com).
